SEP-2322: Multi Round-Trip Requests (#2322)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/seps/2322-MRTR.mdx

  request in step 3 is delivered to the same server instance that the
  original request was delivered to in step 1. This approach, while
  often cheaper than a persistent storage layer, has the following
  drawbacks:
  - It requires special configuration and behavior in the load
    balancers, which is often difficult to manage.
  - It breaks normal load balancing models, resulting in uneven load
    distribution, thus increasing the cost of running the service.
  - It requires special behavior in clients to propagate the cookies
    used for statefulness.
  - It requires the tool implementation to match up the elicitation
    request with the ongoing tool call. (The MCP SDKs have some code to
    handle this, but it's still a very strange pattern in the HTTP
    world.)
  - It is not fault tolerant. If the server instance goes down, all
    state is lost, and the tool call would need to start over from
    scratch. (This doesn't necessarily matter for ephemeral tools,
    but it is an issue for persistent tools.)

Also, both of these approaches rely on the use of an SSE stream, which
causes problems in environments that cannot support long-lived

> connections. They also require an instance of the tool to stay in memory

Reviewer: SSE streams are not necessarily long-lived. And I don't think long-lived SSE streams are necessary in either of these cases, but would be happy to be corrected on this.

tools, we do want to continue to support persistent tools, which generally
already require a persistent storage layer.

## Specification

This SEP proposes a new mechanism for handling server requests in the
context of a client request. This new mechanism will have a slightly
different workflow for ephemeral tools and persistent tools, the latter
of which will leverage Tasks. However, both workflows will use the same
data structures.

First, we introduce the notion of "input requests", which represents
a set of one or more server-initiated request to be sent to the client,
and "input responses", which represents the client's responses to
those requests. Both requests and responses are stored in a map with
string keys. For input requests, the map values are server-initiated
requests (e.g., elicitation or sampling requests), whereas for input
responses, the map values are the responses to those requests. Here's
how that would look in the typescript MCP schema:

```typescript
export type InputRequest =
  | CreateMessageRequest
  | ElicitRequest
  | ListRootsRequest;

export interface InputRequests {
  [key: string]: InputRequest;
}

> export type InputResponse =

Reviewer 2: This isn't really an error; it's a response saying that the original request is incomplete.

We discussed this earlier and decided to add the `input_type` field to discriminate response types.

> export type InputResponse =

Author: @Randgalt since the calls are totally decoupled, in the ephemeral case the Client doesn't need to provide error information back to the server. If it declines the elicitation it just never makes a second tool call.

  | CreateMessageResult
  | ElicitResult
  | ListRootsResult;

export interface InputResponses {
  [key: string]: InputResponse;
}
```

The keys are assigned by the server when issuing the requests. The client
will send the response for each request using the corresponding key.
For example, a server might send the following input requests:

```json5

> "inputRequests": {

Reviewer 3: @CaitieM20 any thoughts on this?

> "inputRequests": {

Reviewer 2: There is no implied ordering.  See my reply above for details.

> "inputRequests": {

Author: @Randgalt No implied ordering, If the elicitations are dependent on each other the server will need to handle that on their side by issuing them one at a time, and enforcing the causality chain that way.

> "inputRequests": {

Reviewer 3: I can't imagine a scenario where a server would want to send multiple `InputRequests` but not care about the ordering. This seems odd.

    participant S as Server (Stateless)
    C->>S: tools/call (id: 1)
    note right of S: Server needs more info<br/>Generates requestState
    S-->>C: IncompleteResult (id: 1, inputRequests, requestState)
    note over C,S: Initial Request Terminated

    C->>U: Prompts user for input
    U-->>C: Provides responses

    C->>S: tools/call (id: 2, inputResponses, requestState)
    note right of S: Server reconstitutes state<br/>Completes execution
    S-->>C: Result (id: 2, final content)
```

Note that the requests in steps 1 and 3 are completely independent: the
server that processes the request in step 3 does not need any
information that is not directly present in the request. To support this decoupling the JsonRPC Id MUST be different between the requests sent in step 1 and step 3.

The schema would look something like this:

```typescript
// Incomplete response.  May be sent in response to any client-initiated
// request.
// At least one of the the inputRequests and requestState fields must be
// present, since the presence of these fields allow the client to
// determine that the result is incomplete.
export interface IncompleteResult extends Result {

>   status: "incomplete";

Author: this got put on the Result object.

  // Requests issued by the server that must be complete before the
  // client can retry the original request.
  inputRequests?: InputRequests;
  // Request state to be passed back to the server when the client
  // retries the original request.
  // Note: The client must treat this as an opaque blob; it must not
  // interpret it in any way.

>   requestState?: string;

Reviewer 3: If this will be serialized JSON, any thoughts about maximum length? It could get large.

Author: Thanks @halter73 for the reply, we've had a few discussions on transport working groups about hard limits, and have chosen not to make them part of the protocol, these should be things like best practices.

     encode the state in any format (e.g., plain JSON, base64-encoded
     JSON, encrypted JWT, serialized binary, etc.).
   - If a request contains a `requestState` field, servers MUST always
     validate that state, as the client is an untrusted intermediary.
     If tampering is a concern, servers SHOULD encrypt the `requestState`
     field using an encryption algorithm of their choice (e.g., they can
     use AES-GCM or a signed JWT) to ensure both confidentiality and
     integrity. Note that there is also a risk of replaying/hijacking
     attacks, where an authenticated attacker resends state that was
     originally sent to a different user. Therefore, if the request
     state contains any data that is specific to the original user, the
     server MUST use some mechanism to cryptographically bind the data
     to the original user and MUST verify that the `requestState` data
     sent by the client is associated with the currently authenticated
     user. Servers using plaintext state MUST treat the decoded
     values as untrusted input and validate them the same way they would
     validate any client-supplied data.

> 2. **Client Behavior:**

Author: +1 protocol version should indicate how the capabilities of elicitation, sampling & roots work over the transport

| **SEP** | 2322 |
| **Title** | Multi Round-Trip Requests |
| **Status** | Approved With Changes |
| **Type** | Standards Track |
| **Created** | 2026-02-03 |
| **Author(s)** | Mark D. Roth ([@markdroth](https://github.com/markdroth)), Caitie McCaffrey ([@CaitieM20](https://github.com/CaitieM20)), |
| **Sponsor** | Caitie McCaffrey ([@CaitieM20](https://github.com/CaitieM20)) |
| **PR** | [#2322](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2322) |

---

## Abstract

This proposal specifies a simple way to handle server-initiated requests
in the context of a client-initiated request (e.g., an elicitation
request in the context of a tool call) without requiring a shared
storage layer shared across server instances or statefulness in
load balancing, which will significantly reduce the cost of operating
MCP servers at scale in the common case. It also reduces the HTTP
transport's dependence on SSE streams, which cause problems in a lot of
environments that cannot support long-lived connections.

This proposed way of handling server-initiated requests will replace the current approach of sending server-initiated requests. This is a breaking change.

> This SEP also specifies the subset of client requests that a server can
> send a server-initiated request on. This is a reduced scope compared to the current spec and is also a breaking change.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This SEP also makes changes to server initiated requests. All server-initiated requests must be issued within the scope of a client request. The SEP also defines the subset of client requests that a server can send a server-initiated request on. These changes are breaking changes.
```

discuss tool calls as a proxy for any client-initiated request, but it
should be read as applying equally to (e.g.) resource or prompt
requests; similarly, we will discuss elicitation requests as a proxy for
any server-initiated request, but it should be read as applying equally
to (e.g.) sampling requests.

We start with the observation that there are two types of MCP tools:

1. **Ephemeral**: No state is accumulated on the server side.
   - If server needs more info to process the tool call, it can start from
     scratch when it gets that additional info.
   - Examples: weather app, accessing email
2. **Persistent**: State is accumulated on the server side.
   - Server may generate a large amount of state before requesting more
     info from the client, and it may need to pick up that state to
     continue processing after it receives the info from the client.
   - Server may need to continue processing in the background while
     waiting for more info from the client, in which case server-side
     state is needed to track that ongoing processing.
   - Examples: accessing an agent, spinning up a VM and needing user
     interaction to manipulate the VM

> The vast majority of MCP tools will be ephemeral, and it is extremely
> common for tools to be deployed in a horizontally scaled, load balanced

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The vast majority of MCP tools will be ephemeral, and it is
common for tools to be deployed in a horizontally scaled, load balanced
```

different workflow for ephemeral tools and persistent tools, the latter
of which will leverage Tasks. However, both workflows will use the same
data structures.

### Schema Changes

First, we introduce the notion of `InputRequests`, which represents
a set of one or more server-initiated request to be sent to the client,
and `InputResponses`, which represents the client's responses to
those requests. Both requests and responses are stored in a map with
string keys. For `InputRequests`, the map values are server-initiated
requests (e.g., elicitation or sampling requests), whereas for `InputResponses`, the map values are the responses to those requests. Here's
how that would look in the typescript MCP schema:

```typescript
export type InputRequest =
  | CreateMessageRequest
  | ElicitRequest
  | ListRootsRequest;

export interface InputRequests {
  [key: string]: InputRequest;
}

export type InputResponse =
  | CreateMessageResult
  | ElicitResult
  | ListRootsResult;

export interface InputResponses {
  [key: string]: InputResponse;
}
```

The keys are assigned by the server when issuing the requests. The client
will send the response for each request using the corresponding key.

> For example, a server might send the following input requests:

Reviewer 4: Do we have guidance for how these keys should be set? Maybe I am missing the point, but it feels most will just use a stack like approach to setting it, to understand the ordering of the `InputResponse`'s?

Author: We leave it up to the server, in the spec docs we added more specific language of they must be unique across a task, and for a request/response, which will happen by default because its a dictionary.

export interface InputResponseRequestParams extends RequestParams {
  // New field to carry the responses for the server's requests from the
  // IncompleteResult message. For each key in the response's inputRequests
  // field, the same key must appear here with the associated response.
  inputResponses?: InputResponses;
  // Request state passed back to the server from the client.
  requestState?: string;
}
```

Since this change creates a polymorphic response for method calls like 'tools/call', we are introducing a new field to `Result` which indicate the `ResultType`. The client should parse this field to determine the type of the Result contained in the message. If this field is not provided the Client should assume a `ResultType` of "complete" for backwards compatibility. The schema change will look like this:

```typescript
/**
 * Common result fields.
 *
 * @category Common Types
 */
export interface Result {
  _meta?: MetaObject;
  // New field to indicate the type of the result, which allows the client to determine how to parse the result object. If no resultType is specified "complete" should be assumed.

>   resultType?: ResultType;

Reviewer 4: I know @CaitieM20 has this as a follow-up. I think this should not be optional, but rather always be set. We have protocol versioning in place to allow SDKs to understand the difference (they should handle that anyway since its a complete new transport).

  [key: string]: unknown;
}

export type ResultType =
  | "complete" // the request completed successfully and the result contains the final content.

>   | "incomplete"; // the request is incomplete and the result contains an {@link IncompleteResult} object

Reviewer 4: Just checking that we are okay with 'incomplete' here and not 'pending' or 'requires_roundtrip' or 'in_process'. I feel 'incomplete' implies there is a result, but it's incomplete, whereas my understanding is that there is no final result in most cases where we are inside a multi-roundtrip. 'incomplete' also feels like something that is more broadly applicable to other result types. E.g. you cna imagine a streamed response in the future to be 'incomplete'. Anyway, I am bikeshedding here, and I am not a native speaker, but I do think we can find a better adjective here.

```

> We anticipate this field will be useful for future extensibility, as it allows us to introduce new types of results and can also apply to `tasks` as well.

Reviewer 4: This is more evidence that we should rename the options for result types, as it is too generic if we expand the result type to other concepts.

Author: will do

  inputResponses?: InputResponses;
  // Request state passed back to the server from the client.
  requestState?: string;
}
```

Since this change creates a polymorphic response for method calls like 'tools/call', we are introducing a new field to `Result` which indicate the `ResultType`. The client should parse this field to determine the type of the Result contained in the message. If this field is not provided the Client should assume a `ResultType` of "complete" for backwards compatibility. The schema change will look like this:

```typescript
/**
 * Common result fields.
 *
 * @category Common Types
 */
export interface Result {
  _meta?: MetaObject;
  // New field to indicate the type of the result, which allows the client to determine how to parse the result object. If no resultType is specified "complete" should be assumed.
  resultType?: ResultType;
  [key: string]: unknown;
}

export type ResultType =
  | "complete" // the request completed successfully and the result contains the final content.
  | "incomplete"; // the request is incomplete and the result contains an {@link IncompleteResult} object
```

> We anticipate this field will be useful for future extensibility, as it allows us to introduce new types of results and can also apply to `tasks` as well.

Reviewer 5: Now that tasks will be moved out to an extension, I think we need to define the intended client behavior for unrecognized result types for extensibility. In the context of tasks, the `task` result type will only be recognized by a client that uses that extension, and will mean something invalid if it does not.

Author: I'm not sure we need to specify this, This is a badly behaving server if it sends this, so clients should handle this in the same way they would handle any poorly structured data from the server (i.e. not process it and fail the request).

long-lived connections, nor would it have addressed fault tolerance
issues.

There was discussion about whether the input requests should be a
map or just a single object, possibly leveraging some field inside of
the requests (e.g., the elicitation ID) to differentiate between them.
We decided that the map makes sense, since it structurally guarantees
the uniqueness of keys, which will avoid the need for explicit checks in
SDKs and applications to avoid conflicts.

In the persistent workflow, we considered including the input requests
directly in the `tasks/get` response, rather than requiring the client
to see the `input_required` status and then call `tasks/result` to get
the input requests. We decided to keep those two things separate in
deference to implementations that use separate infrastructure for task
state and for the actual tool implementation; the idea is that the
`tasks/get` call should have a consistent latency profile, regardless of
what the task state actually is. We recognize that this requires an
extra round-trip to the server, but we can optimize this in the future
if becomes a problem.

## Backward Compatibility

> 

Author: @halter73, @felixweinberger, @maxisbey, @maciej-kisiel I updated this section to reflect what was discussed at the MCP Maintainer meetup in New York, can you please take a look.  I'd like to close out on this by next week.

Reviewer 6: If I interpret this section correctly, then it will be legal to support the old `await`-style syntax in the new SDK versions with the behavior of advertising the `2025-11-25` as the protocol version supported by the server (i.e. no wrapping of MRTR underneath by the SDK). Enabling `2026-06-XX` would then require some manual adjustment (e.g. declaration that server-to-client communication is not used or rewriting the handlers to be MRTR-compatible).

If we're aligned on this, then the section LGTM.

Author: yes I think that's correct. There is some discussion of should we flag the old await style behavior as deprecated (i.e. 2025-11-25 is the last version this is supported) just so developers understand the future path.

   - If server needs more info to process the tool call, it can start from
     scratch when it gets that additional info.
   - Examples: weather app, accessing email
2. **Persistent**: State is accumulated on the server side.
   - Server may generate a large amount of state before requesting more
     info from the client, and it may need to pick up that state to
     continue processing after it receives the info from the client.
   - Server may need to continue processing in the background while
     waiting for more info from the client, in which case server-side
     state is needed to track that ongoing processing.
   - Examples: accessing an agent, spinning up a VM and needing user
     interaction to manipulate the VM

The vast majority of MCP tools will be ephemeral, and it is extremely
common for tools to be deployed in a horizontally scaled, load balanced
service, so we need to optimize for this case.

Today, if a tool needs to send an elicitation request in order to make
progress, the workflow works like this:

1. Client sends tool call request. For this example, let's assume that
   the load balancers happen to send this request to server instance A.

> 2. Server A opens an SSE stream and sends the elicitation response on that

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this looks like a typo.

> 2. Server A opens an SSE stream and sends the elicitation response on that

Author: fixed

Note that while the goal here is to optimize the common case of ephemeral
tools, we do want to continue to support persistent tools, which generally
already require a persistent storage layer.

## Specification

This SEP proposes a new mechanism for handling server requests in the
context of a client request. This new mechanism will have a slightly
different workflow for ephemeral tools and persistent tools, the latter
of which will leverage Tasks. However, both workflows will use the same
data structures.

First, we introduce the notion of "input requests", which represents
a set of one or more server-initiated request to be sent to the client,
and "input responses", which represents the client's responses to
those requests. Both requests and responses are stored in a map with
string keys. For input requests, the map values are server-initiated
requests (e.g., elicitation or sampling requests), whereas for input
responses, the map values are the responses to those requests. Here's
how that would look in the typescript MCP schema:

```typescript
export type InputRequest =
  | CreateMessageRequest
  | ElicitRequest
  | ListRootsRequest;

export interface InputRequests {

>   [key: string]: InputRequest;

Reviewer 2: It's a map.  There is no implied ordering.

In the ephemeral workflow, the expectation is that the client will attach all responses when it retries the original request, so they all need to be processed at once.  If the client retried the original request with only a subset of the required input responses, the server would generally return another incomplete response with the remaining input requests.

In the persistent workflow, it is conceivably possible that the server could be making progress on multiple operations in parallel, and any given input request may be blocking progress on only one of those operations, so there could be value in the client providing the input responses as it completes them rather than waiting until it has all of them to return them all at once.  However, even in that scenario, there is no ordering implied by the protocol.

>   [key: string]: InputRequest;

Reviewer 3: My comment was about the requests, not the responses. I can't imagine a scenario where a server would want to send multiple `InputRequests` but not care about the ordering. This seems odd.

>   [key: string]: InputRequest;

Reviewer 2: I'm not aware of any case where the order would matter.  Can you give me an example of such a case?

As an example of a case where order does *not* matter, let's say that a tool knows that a tool needs access to two different services, each of which has its own login credentials.  In that case, the server needs to generate two different input requests, one for the login credentials for each service, and the order of those requests is irrelevant.

>   [key: string]: InputRequest;

Reviewer 3: I can think of loads. What if a tool needs to know a user's address and also a set of preferences. A tool writer would likely want to control which one of those the user sees first. In general, the tool is the requestor of the elicitation. Of course, it could send them out one at a time but then that is merely question begging. Any question a tool author might ask the author would almost certainly want to control the order that they're asked and not have to revert to asking one at a time in order to get that behavior.

>   [key: string]: InputRequest;

Reviewer 2: Why would a user's address and preferences need to be ordered?  I wouldn't expect those two things to depend on each other.

I'm not hearing a concrete example of where order would actually matter.  I don't doubt that there could be such cases, but I don't think they will be the common case.  As such, it seems like it should be fine for the server to serialize the requests in those uncommon cases.

>   [key: string]: InputRequest;

Reviewer 3: Because a server might care about the U/X and how and in which order questions are asked. I'll bet some servers might figure out that InputRequests are processed alphabetically (they might be) and start naming their keys "aaaNameAndAddress", "bbbSomethingElse". Frankly, it just seems odd that a server can specify the questions to ask but not be allow to specify the order of those questions. It will lead to clients/SDKs asking in unpredictable ordering and could cause support issues.

>   [key: string]: InputRequest;

Reviewer 2: As I said, I think that if a server really cares about the order, then it needs to handle the input requests sequentially.

I don't think that order is something we should bake into the protocol just for a hypothetical use-case for which there is an obvious alternative.

}

// New RequestParams type includes fields for retried requests.
// These parameters may be included in any client-initiated request.
export interface RetryAugmentedRequestParams extends RequestParams {
  // New field to carry the responses for the server's requests from the
  // IncompleteResult message. For each key in the response's inputRequests
  // field, the same key must appear here with the associated response.
  inputResponses?: InputResponses;
  // Request state passed back to the server from the client.
  requestState?: string;
}
```

Since this change creates a polymorphic response for method calls like 'tools/call', we are introducing a new field to `Result` which indicate the `ResultType` the client should parse. If this field is not provided the Client should assume a `ResultType` of "complete" for backwards compatibility. The schema change will look like this:

```typescript
/**
 * Common result fields.
 *
 * @category Common Types
 */
export interface Result {
  _meta?: MetaObject;
  // New field to indicate the type of the result, which allows the client to determine how to parse the result object. If no result_type is specified "complete" should be assumed.

>   result_type?: ResultType;

Reviewer 2: Yeah, agreed, this should be `resultType`.

>   result_type?: ResultType;

Author: fixing

The schema looks like this:

```typescript

> export interface InputRequiredResult extends Result {

Reviewer 2: What was the motivation for changing "incomplete" to "input required"?

I don't think "input required" is an accurate term here, because this result type can be used when there is not actually any input required.  As described elsewhere in this SEP, it's totally valid to send this result type with requestState set but inputRequests unset.

Author: DSP asked for the change. What you are describing is a valid but less likely scenario, really this type is used to ask for more input from the user/agent.  The man concern here was that Incomplete can be confusing with Tasks. Because tool calls can also return a "task" type. Which is also an incomplete tool call to some extent.

Reviewer 2: Okay, I guess that makes sense.  Thanks for the context.

  _meta?: MetaObject;
  // New field to indicate the type of the result, which allows the client to determine how to parse the result object. If no result_type is specified "complete" should be assumed.
  result_type?: ResultType;
  [key: string]: unknown;
}

export type ResultType =
  | "complete" // the request completed successfully and the result contains the final content.
  | "incomplete"; // the request is incomplete and the result contains an {@link IncompleteResult} object
```

We anticipate this field will be useful for future extensibility, as it allows us to introduce new types of results and can also apply to `tasks` as well.

Note that both the "inputRequests" and "requestState" fields affect
only the client's next retry of the original request. They will not
be used for any other request that the client may be sending in parallel
(e.g., a tool list or even another tool call).

Note that the ephemeral workflow is incompatible with URL-based
elicitations; those will instead be supported only via the persistent
workflow described below. As a result, there is no longer a need for
the `URLElicitationRequiredError` error code. That code will be removed

> from the spec.

Reviewer 2: If we are keeping URL elicitation support, I think we need to specify exactly how it should work, because it's not obvious to me how this would work in the context of MRTR.

I assume this would be handled by the server returning an input request containing the URL elicitation request.  Then, once the URL elicitation has been completed, the client would presumably need to retry the original request with an input response -- but in this case, wouldn't there not actually be an input response to return, given that the elicitation response actually went to the URL instead?
